# SARS-CoV-2-Indels
This repository includes codes we used to study indels in the SARS-CoV-2 genomes. It should be noted that due to GISAID privacy and policy, some input data used for our calculations are not publicly available.

We show that in-frame insertions and deletions (indels) play a significant and rapidly increasing role in the evolution of the SARS-CoV-2 genome. The percentage of genomes and lineages with indels is increasing rapidly, especially in the emerging variants of concern (VOCs). Monitoring of SARS-CoV-2 genome evolution uncovers co-occurrence (i.e., highly correlated presence) of indels, especially deletions on spike N-terminal domain and non-structural protein 6 (NSP6) is a shared feature in several VOCs such as Alpha, Beta, Delta, and Omicron. Indels are highly recurrent (appear independently multiple times) in SARS-CoV-2 proteins and appear to affect interactions with the host immune components. Unlike deletions, insertions are less frequent and appear later during the pandemic. Indels distribution is correlated with spike mutations associated with immune escape and growth in the number of genomes with Indels coincides with the increasing population resistance due to vaccination and previous infections. Indels occur in the spike glycoprotein, but also in other proteins, especially those involved in interactions with the host immune system. We also showed that indels concentrated on specific regions of individual SARS-CoV-2 proteins known as hypervariable regions (HVRs) which are mostly located in protein loop regions. Structural analysis suggests that indels remodel viral proteins’ surfaces at common epitopes and interaction interfaces, affecting the virus’ interactions with host proteins. We hypothesize that the increased frequency of indels, the non-random distribution of them, and their independent co-occurrence in several VOCs from diverse geographic origins (i.e., repeated appearance of the same combinations of indels) is an adaptive response to elevated global population immunity.

Cite Us
Alisoltani, Arghavan, Lukasz Jaroszewski, Mallika Iyer, Arash Iranzadeh, and Adam Godzik. "Increased frequency of recurrent in-frame deletions in new expanding lineages of SARS CoV-2 reflects immune selective pressure." 
